# The State of Deep Learning

## Computer Vision


There are many domains in which deep learning has not been used to analyze images yet, but those where it has been tried have nearly universally shown that computers can recognize what items are in an image at least as well as people can—even specially trained people, such as radiologists. This is known as object recognition. Deep learning is also good at recognizing where objects in an image are, and can highlight their locations and name each found object. This is known as object detection (there is also a variant of this that we saw in <>, where every pixel is categorized based on what kind of object it is part of—this is called segmentation). Deep learning algorithms are generally not good at recognizing images that are significantly different in structure or style to those used to train the model. For instance, if there were no black-and-white images in the training data, the model may do poorly on black-and-white images. Similarly, if the training data did not contain hand-drawn images, then the model will probably do poorly on hand-drawn images. There is no general way to check what types of images are missing in your training set, but we will show in this chapter some ways to try to recognize when unexpected image types arise in the data when the model is being used in production (this is known as checking for out-of-domain data).

One major challenge for object detection systems is that image labelling can be slow and expensive. There is a lot of work at the moment going into tools to try to make this labelling faster and easier, and to require fewer handcrafted labels to train accurate object detection models. One approach that is particularly helpful is to synthetically generate variations of input images, such as by rotating them or changing their brightness and contrast; this is called data augmentation and also works well for text and other types of models. We will be discussing it in detail in this chapter.

Another point to consider is that although your problem might not look like a computer vision problem, it might be possible with a little imagination to turn it into one. For instance, if what you are trying to classify are sounds, you might try converting the sounds into images of their acoustic waveforms and then training a model on those images.

## NLP


Computers are very good at classifying both short and long documents based on categories such as spam or not spam, sentiment (e.g., is the review positive or negative), author, source website, and so forth. We are not aware of any rigorous work done in this area to compare them to humans, but anecdotally it seems to us that deep learning performance is similar to human performance on these tasks. Deep learning is also very good at generating context-appropriate text, such as replies to social media posts, and imitating a particular author's style. It's good at making this content compelling to humans too—in fact, even more compelling than human-generated text. However, deep learning is currently not good at generating correct responses! We don't currently have a reliable way to, for instance, combine a knowledge base of medical information with a deep learning model for generating medically correct natural language responses. This is very dangerous, because it is so easy to create content that appears to a layman to be compelling, but actually is entirely incorrect.

Another concern is that context-appropriate, highly compelling responses on social media could be used at massive scale—thousands of times greater than any troll farm previously seen—to spread disinformation, create unrest, and encourage conflict. As a rule of thumb, text generation models will always be technologically a bit ahead of models recognizing automatically generated text. For instance, it is possible to use a model that can recognize artificially generated content to actually improve the generator that creates that content, until the classification model is no longer able to complete its task.

Despite these issues, deep learning has many applications in NLP: it can be used to translate text from one language to another, summarize long documents into something that can be digested more quickly, find all mentions of a concept of interest, and more. Unfortunately, the translation or summary could well include completely incorrect information! However, the performance is already good enough that many people are using these systems—for instance, Google's online translation system (and every other online service we are aware of) is based on deep learning.


> "Si j'avais neuf heures pour abattre un arbre, je passerais les six premières à affûter ma hache". -Abraham Lincoln

You can also go to [Computer Vision](computer-vision)
